good afternoon and welcome to today's
Downing Street press conference I'm
joined by Chris witty chief medical
officer and so Patrick balance the chief
scientific adviser can I start with an
update on the prime minister he's still
in intensive care but he continues to
make positive step forwards and he's in
good spirits and I can also report from
the government's ongoing monitoring and
testing program that as of today 240
3421 people have been tested for the
virus 65,000 and 77 have tested positive
and the number of people admitted to
hospital with coronavirus symptoms now
stands at 16,000 784 and those who have
contracted the virus seven thousand nine
hundred and seventy eight have sadly
died and our thoughts and our prayers
are with their families and their
friends the whole country has been
practicing a stringent form of social
distancing for three weeks now precisely
because we're doing everything we can to
minimize the bleak numbers that I just
read out and for that I want to say a
massive thank you to everyone who's gone
the extra mile during this very
challenging period thank you to all of
those who are looking after us in our
time of need the NHS workers on the
front line who have treated the sick
saved lives and tended for those who
sadly could not be saved for the doctors
and nurses who have died of coronavirus
whilst caring for others we will never
forget their sacrifice we will never
forget their devotion to helping others
I also want to say big thank you to the
carers the charity workers all those
looking after or even just keeping an
eye on those in their local
neighbourhood you are the lifeline to so
many people in our communities thank you
to the workers who keep the country
running the supermarket work is the
delivery drivers the technicians the
cleaners the public servants who just
kept going
determined to keep providing the daily
services that we all rely on
I think you've certainly made us all
think long and hard about who the key
workers are in our lives thank you to
the volunteers who have stepped up
across the country who's big hearted
sense of responsibility defines British
community spirit at its very best and a
massive thank you to every single person
who stayed home to stop this terrible
virus from spreading
you've helped protect the NHS and you've
helped to save lives now as we look onto
the look forward to the long bank
holiday Easter weekend I know some
people are going to start wondering is
it time to ease up on the rules so I
have to say thank you for your sacrifice
but also we're not done yet we must keep
going let me just explain a little bit
about why that's so important today I
chaired a cobra meeting with senior
ministers officials and represented
representatives from Scotland Wales
Northern Ireland as well as the mayor of
London so that we could take stock and
assess where we are right across the
United Kingdom and at this stage the
government is continuing to gather all
of the relevant data to obtain the
fullest picture possible of the effects
of the social distancing measures that
we've put in place now while the early
signs suggest that they are having the
impact that we need to see it's too
early to say that conclusively
saij will meet next week to discuss the
latest evidence and we'll keep the
measures we've put in place under review
as we've said on many occasions now
we'll be guided by the science at all
times so we don't expect to be able to
say more on this until the end of next
week and let me just be again very clear
about this the measures will have to
stay in place until we've got the
evidence that clearly shows we've moved
beyond the peak now I know these
restrictions take their doll take their
toll day-in day-out on people's
livelihoods on people's quality of life
on people's mental health and I
appreciate that it's often the little
things
hurt the most with the Easter Bank
holiday coming up aren't normally spend
it with my two boys seven and five years
old with their grandparents doing an
Easter egg hunt and I know there's going
to be lots of people who would normally
be planning a family get-together or
just getting out in the sunshine with
friends and loved ones unfortunately
right now we just can't do those sorts
of things and I'm really sorry about
that but just take a moment to think of
the progress that we've already made
following the guidance staying at home
denying the virus what it needs to
spread more easily and to kill more
people it's been almost three weeks and
we're starting to see the impact of the
sacrifices we've all made but the deaths
are still rising and we haven't yet
reached the peak of the virus so it's
still too early to lift the measures
that we've put in place we must stick to
the plan and we must continue to be
guided by the science our top priority
our immediate priority remains to slow
the spread of the virus and to save as
many lives as possible and that's why we
have to continue to ask y'all to keep
complying with the guidance and as we've
said consistently from the outset it's
vital we take the right decisions at the
right time and the Moyne and the most
important thing right now is that people
continue to follow the government's
guidance until we've got the evidence
that the virus is firmly under control
so that means please do stay at home to
protect our NHS and to save lives after
all the efforts that everyone's made
after all the sacrifices so many people
have made let's not ruin it now let's
not undo the gains we've made let's not
waste the sacrifices so many people have
made we mustn't give the coronavirus a
second chance to kill more people and to
hurt our country I know it's tough going
but this is a team effort and we'll only
defeat this virus for good if we all
stay the course so please stay home this
back holiday weekend for everyone's sake
and I will turn to Sir Patrick to give
us an update on the very latest data so
Patrick over to you thank you very much
as first secretary have said the
measures that everybody has taken the
difficult things that we've all had to
do are making a difference and they're
making a big difference
we know that the social distancing is
working and we know that people are
doing what they're supposed to do and we
need to keep doing that and the reason
we need to keep doing that is because it
stops the transmission of the virus in
the community and we know that that is
already happening next slide please
as a result of stopping the transmission
in the community we stopped new cases
appearing and this slide the numbers go
up and down a bit but what you can see
is it's not taking off in that sharp
uptake it's not gone sky-high and if
anything there might even be some
flattening that is because of what we're
all doing with social distancing if we
had not done that those cases would now
be very much higher if those cases were
higher next slide please
then this graph wouldn't look like this
we would find many many more people in
hospital we would find the Health System
potentially overrun and what you can see
on this graph is the increase in
hospital admissions people in hospital
beds with kovat and it has gone up
across the country but it's not gone up
in that steep way and again if anything
we're beginning to see the first signs
of this leveling off too early to be
sure to early to know that this is on
the way down but it's not got that fast
upswing that it would have had had you
all will not been doing what we are
doing with these difficult measures of
social distancing and if the hospital
beds were fuller next slide please
then importantly so with the intensive
care units be even fuller and people are
working heroic ly in intensive care
units to look after the very sick
patients who have
but again this is not the sharp upstroke
of big increases in numbers it's a
steady increase in numbers which might
just might be beginning to flatten off
but it's certainly not accelerating that
means that the NHS can cope it's got the
right numbers of beds with the new
expansion in order to be able to cope
with this so if we were not doing what
we're doing and if we don't continue to
do what we're doing in terms of the
social distancing we put all of this at
risk we jeopardize the things allowed us
to get to this position and if I can
have the last slide please
unfortunately sadly there are deaths
from this disease and those continue to
rise and you can see here the increase
in rise in the UK and in other countries
this will not change for a few weeks
because the deaths come after the other
illnesses the early illness the
intensive care and then in some patients
unfortunately die and that will continue
to increase for a few weeks we need to
see this begin to go down as well it
should follow the others so the message
is clear which is the social distancing
that we're all doing is breaking
transmission it's stopping the hospital
admissions beginning to see that
flattening off still unbelievably busy
but beginning to see that flatten off
it's preventing more people going into
intensive care and it will prevent
deaths it's incredibly important we
continue to do what we're doing Thank
You Patrick now we take some questions
from the media I think Hugh pin from the
BBC is first up q thank you we've heard
some harrowing stories of people dying
alone because family can't be with them
for understandable reasons to do with
the virus risk what do you say to the
British public about how things will
develop from here well the first thing I
would say is thank you for all you're
doing
not just the key workers as essential as
they are and we've applauded them
the incredible work they've done but
also to every individual who's followed
the advice and the guidance but we've
made progress Patrick has set that out I
think very clearly but we don't know
conclusively that we're beyond the point
at which we could start considering
whether the mayor will be relaxed so we
must keep it up and I think the key
thing is for people to understand how
much of what they've already done has
helped contribute to avoiding an even
worse situation in terms of the spread
of the virus and the number of deaths
and how important it is that we don't
slow up all or take our pressure off at
this critical moment before we've come
through the peak so we recognize the
sacrifices so many people have made it's
a team effort and as a country we need
to be united in this mission we've got
to keep it up did you want to come back
with anything further Hugh maybe maybe -
Patrick valence or a little bit more on
the death projections that you that you
have got I know it's difficult but how
long and how fast you expect the deaths
to carry on rising in general I'd expect
the death to continue to keep going up
for about two weeks after the
intensive-care picture improves and so
we're not there yet in terms of knowing
exactly when that will be but that's the
sort of timeframe I'd expect Sam Coates
from Sky I suspect Britain needs a
little bit of hope going into this
Easter weekend - Dominic Rob will the
government set out in public the
principles that will guide you when you
do finally come to lifting this knock
down Angela Merkel the German Chancellor
said today that the German government
will do that next week can you commit to
doing something similar and - Chris
witty and till three weeks ago you were
very concerned about the speed that the
coronavirus was whipping through
communities can you say how fast it is
now going and being transmitted has that
transmission rate now come down or is it
still going through Britain as fast as
it was thanks Sam we'll look at the
positive is that I think as we hope
set out clearly we can show people that
all the sacrifices that they've been
made and all the forbearance that
they've shown has made a real difference
it has saved lives
it is help protect the NHS and we're
also not on the same point along the
peak as the Germans so I'm not sure that
the direct analysis works but what we
will do is continue to be followed by
the evidence and the science and as
we've always said and as I said earlier
we'll take the right decisions at the
right moment in time answering directly
the question that you asked about the
speed at the time when I was first
talking about this the doubling time how
fast we were doubling in terms of
numbers particularly in intensive care
was around about three days varied a bit
this has got steadily longer in time
over the last two weeks thanks to what
people have done and as the Patrick
showed in the data this is really now
becoming not quite flat but it is
doubling time is now six or more days in
almost everywhere in the country and
extending in time that is that would
that has only happened because of what
everybody has done what we've all done
in terms of staying at home and only
going out for work exercise and critical
shopping and medical care if I can just
add one thing in terms of the principles
and this is not principles except in the
narrow sense of health I think is
important to remember that there are the
direct effects of people dying from
coronavirus and this has been affected
by people helping to pull the curve down
but there are also indirect effects
which have to be taken into account when
we're thinking about the health effects
over the long term those include the
indirect effects were the NHS to be
overwhelmed and the cause of people's
actions the there is still room in
intensive care but still room in the
emergency services across the country in
terms of other health issues but we also
have to remember the effects on things
that have to be delayed to free up NHS
space and we have to think about the
effects of the long term health effects
of some of the economic measures and
these are all health things and there
are other
Nanak and other things that need to be
taken into account by ministers but for
me as a doctor and think about the
health things all of these need to be
taken into account in working out how is
the best way to go to the next stage in
this epidemic Kris spoke about the
doubling time in intensive care which
has got longer if you look in the
community at the moment you would expect
there to be no doubling time this is not
doubling in the community you would
expect this now to be shrinking for all
the reasons I've said and the evidence
suggests that that's what's happening in
terms of the transmission in community
so that's all points in the right
direction and the doubling time in ICU
is a reflection of what's happening
earlier and the efforts that have been
made in terms of social distancing so
did you want to follow up and just in
terms of publishing the principles that
we will rely on perhaps not next week
because we are as you say in a different
place to Germany but will the British
government at some point explain to the
British people in a document the
trade-offs and the evidence about how
they're going to go about lifting a lot
better well look we'll make the right
decisions at the right moment and we'll
be guided by the sides I think that's
really all I'd say at this point but
just remember I think the the focus and
we don't see any distraction from that
as we look forward to the long bank
holiday weekend is just picking up on
the evidence that Patrick and Chris has
set out is not to take our eye off the
ball not to undo all the good work not
to undo the sacrifices so many people
have made by becoming more lacks or
failing to follow the guidance at just
the moment where we need to make sure we
double down follow the guidance get
through this peak I think that's the
most important thing right now
Hannah Miller from ITV Granada thank you
foreign secretary two questions for you
today Greater Manchester Police revealed
that last weekend they received reports
of more than a thousand gatherings how
can they possibly be expected to please
Matt when around a fifth of their staff
are not in work and secondly I want to
talk to you about furling we've spoke
bellowing sorry we've spoken to a blind
warehouse worker in Rochdale call
Joe he's worried about being able to
socially distance and he's being told to
go in or to take unpaid leave the
government said it wants employers to
take socially responsible decisions does
that sound socially responsible to you I
don't know all the details of the case
but it sounds like a very vulnerable
individual we provided the support to
employers we know they're under pressure
and we want all businesses to do the
right thing we're doing our bit and I
think it's important for us all to pull
together and particularly for the most
vulnerable in our communities so I'd
want people to think employees to think
long and hard if they have people like
that who they're employing and who are
within their care in a broader sense and
on the issue I think it was Greater
Manchester Police and the police doing a
great job and it's a very difficult line
for them to walk and but I think they're
doing a terrific job and above all as we
go into this long bank holiday weekend I
think people should think very long and
hard not just about the guidance and the
importance of keeping up but about what
happens to those on the NHS frontline
who are doing a heroic job if people in
larger numbers don't comply with those
rules and I would urge everyone just
take a moment before they do anything
however warm it is however great the
temptations just to think about the
sacrifices those in the frontline
particularly in our NHS are making do
you want to come back yeah thanks just
on the furloughing and and guidance
around people with disabilities do you
accept that the guidance around social
distancing for people with disabilities
perhaps needs to be looked at in a bit
more detail well we can certainly take
another look at it but it cause it's the
way it's applied that's really important
with the flexibility and again as I said
a sense of the fact that we all in this
together and we pull through this
together
and so we can always look at the
guidance we want to make sure it's as
clear as possible but it's the way it's
implemented as well which is really
important Ben Kentish from LBC thank you
foreign secretary you talked about the
sacrifices that NHS workers are making
and we're hearing more stories of that
today people losing their lives in some
cases they're telling us because they
got the right equipment now to thank
them for that we worked thousands of
people around the country tonight we'll
take part in the cap through our clap
for our clerk errors but I wondered if
today you could go further and commit to
when this crisis is over giving them a
real reward a financial thank you for
the sacrifices in the earth but they're
making on behalf of us all if I may can
I ask the chief scientific adviser and
Matt Hancock the health secretary
mentioned last week that a surveillance
study was being carried out with an
antibody test that's been developed by
public health England could you tell us
what the early results of that show in
terms of how many people in Britain have
had the virus and how many would you
expect to have had it in the 12 to 18
months or so until a vaccine is
developed thank you but I think they're
really good points I think the carers
and all those on the front line as I pay
tribute to in my earlier remarks a done
an amazing job we're obviously doing
everything we can to provide the
equipment the PPE that they need we're
rolling that out at Pace we you know I
recognise that there have been
challenges with the distribution we've
got a helpline but most importantly
we've we're really rolling them out in
pace we've got the military involved
where that's appropriate I'll be taking
part in the clap for carers this evening
and you're right there will be a moment
where we look at how we formally
recognise all of those in the frontline
have done so much to put us through this
very difficult period for our country on
the surveillance test so this is the
antibody test the first thing to say is
these tests are difficult to get right
so they're across the world people are
trying to get really specific and
sensitive tests on this and that's a lot
of collaboration across the world to do
that the scientists in public health
England have worked on this and yes
there is a surveillance study underway I
don't know the results yet they're not
out this will continue until we've got
the right results and they're able to
communicate them and of course they will
communicate them like all good
scientific practice as soon as they're
ready and they know what what they show
and they can validate that these are
reliable results so that's what's going
on at the moment and in terms of in how
many people would you expect to get this
before
or vaccine or treatment comes along I
think the processes that we've got in
place are clearly to suppress the number
and the idea is to try and keep that
number as low as possible did you want
to come back on any of that Ben if I'm a
foreign state was just you said there'll
be a time to reward NHS workers I
wondered if you just might spec down
personal level what you what form you
think that should take why do you think
it's important while they're doing this
great job and we're all trying to focus
on getting us through the peak that we
keep our our focusing our attention on
that and I'd want to give it proper
thought with all of the other people in
government but what I would say is I
think we all recognize the enormous
sacrifice they've made how much it's
done to help pull us through even to
this level how much is done to avoid
some of the worst scenarios we could
have otherwise faced and I'm sure
there'll be the you know appropriate
level of recognition at the right moment
once we're through the the worst of it
Oliver Wright from The Times thank you a
question first to Professor Witte if I
may um we know that the daily death
figures that you're reporting come from
the NHS but we're expecting next week
fingers from the Office of National
Statistics which will be wider than that
do you expect that when you take into
account care homes and other settings
that will see a significant rise in the
in the total death rate and just to
follow up on on Ben's point with Sir
Patrick John Newton said last week on
this anti-bodies study that's being
carried out at Portland down that they
were days away from having preliminary
results you say that you haven't seen
the results but would you anticipate
that those results were being made
available to the Sage committee that
will advise ministers on the next stage
in the lockdown on the NHS fingers
versus the ons figures so they may
measure different things
the reason the NHS figures are very
useful for us is we can get them very
fast and they are collected in the same
way the whole time and they're very
comparable actually to international
figures which tend to be collected in
the same way so what that allows us to
do is what Patrick was doing at the
beginning which is to see in relatively
near time
the trends over time because it's a
steady it's is a very stable way of
collecting the data
ons data collects a much and those NHS
figures are all people who are proven to
have coronavirus on testing so they're
definitely cases in hospitals the ons
figures are much wider than that I would
therefore expect it's not just that they
go further outside Hospital they also
include people who have sadly died where
the doctor thinks the coronavirus may be
involved even if there is no tests
involved in that decision and I would
expect those numbers to be higher but
because it takes longer for the dates to
come in it's always going to be a lag
behind behind between those two amounts
which makes the ons data extremely
useful for looking at the wider picture
but the NHS data is more useful for us
to make decisions day to day and to make
decisions for example about what we need
to change in terms of our current
interventions yes of course we would
expect to see those results in sage and
we'll see them when they are ready and
the studies have been completed and
they've been properly analyzed and we
spend a lot of time looking at this from
across the world as well had calls with
colleagues from many countries earlier
in this week on this very topic had a
call last night with somebody from
Stanford University doing working in
this area this is something we look at
right the way across the world all the
time and of course the PhD results will
come to Sage when they're ready do you
want to come back on any of that off you
mr. Robbins how do you manage to have
any contact with the prime minister
since you took over his responsibilities
at all not yeah I think it's important
to particularly while he's in intensive
care to let him focus on the recovery we
in the government have got this covered
I chaired the Cobra meetings that I just
come from we're pursuing all the
different strands of our strategy to
defeat the coronavirus and I'm confident
we'll get there George Parker from the
FT soon for the foreign secretary I'd
like to ask you about the Bank of
England's decision today to effectively
extend its overdraft facility to the
government we're told this is a temp
but nevertheless it's very unusual and
you explained exactly why the government
needs this facility and is it possibly
because cost of your economic
interventions to address the crisis are
costing more than you expected
particularly the job retention scheme
and severally a question for professor
Witte we heard today from the US
scientific equipment maker thermo Fisher
they have a an agreement with the
government to supply one hundred
thousand swab tests a day at least now I
just checked that is correct and if so
what are we waiting for
so George on the Bank of England session
obviously we've got an independent Bank
of England they make those decisions
autonomously as you said it's a
temporary measure but the broader
picture is from the fiscal measures that
the Chancellor has taken through to the
measures taken by the Bank of England we
want to make sure that we're in the best
position not just to see us through this
crisis from a health point of view as
important as that is but also from an
economic or economic point of view and
we're making sure that we use all the
levers across government to achieve that
on the testing we're ramping up every
day on the testing but I think it's
important to out to differentiate
between tests available and ready to run
and the whole system running in terms of
in the lab and actually having the whole
system running so you're very confident
that someone who needs a test can order
the right test and will get the right
result back and the whole process is
going up every single day this month I
expect to see an increase in the number
of tests that go out and the number of
results that come back
including thermo Fisher but not only
thermo Fisher there are quite a few
other groups who are involved in this
did you want to follow up there George
yeah just a very quick one to to Kris
Twitty I mean doesn't this really
reflect the fact that the problem lies
in our laboratories and not through any
example shortage of chemicals which is
something that Michael gave go sit last
week mr. Rob very quickly something
going back to your earlier opening
remarks you said the truth will have to
stay in place until we have clear
evidence that clearly shows we've moved
beyond the peak should we assume
therefore that once we have evidence
that shows we have moved beyond the peak
the restrictions will start to be eased
well I think the whole point is not to
make us
but to be guided by the evidence when
we've got it then they Kris with you in
terms of kit I mean both there was a
period when both swabs and reagents were
in short supply that's beginning to sort
itself out that doesn't set that but you
know a testing process is a long chain
of which actually doing the tests is in
the middle of it but there are large
parts either side but the you're
absolutely right that that was a book a
barrier it's much less of a barrier
although it has not gone away completely
but it is a lot better than it was
thanks George Hugo Hugo guy from the
from the I thank you foreign secretary
can I just ask you to clarify the extent
of your own authority in the Prime
Minister's absence where where you're
chairing the committees and the cabinet
that he would normally do are you
authorized to make big decisions for
example on lifting the lockdown a
decision that's gonna have to come next
week if the Prime Minister is still
unavailable can you make that decision
in the same way that he did that he
would do and Sir Patrick can I just ask
as you pointed out the mass surveillance
testing results are not not yet
available do you have any estimate at
all for how many people in the UK have
probably been infected with corona virus
or are we just still flying blind on
that one so thanks very much you go look
we've got all the authority I need to
make the relevant decisions whether it's
through chairing cabinet updates as I
did earlier in the week chairing Cobra
or indeed the meetings or the morning
meetings of senior ministers we've got a
great team it's a team effort and
obviously it's not exactly the same as
when the Prime Minister was here that's
very clear and but as he's first
secretary deputized to discharge his
responsibilities with all the authority
we need I think into in terms of the
test one of the reasons it's so
important to get that test out is to try
and work out the proportion of people
who may have had the disease a
symptomatically I think across the world
is looking less likely that it's a very
high number so it's not likely that it's
90% of people have had it a
cinematically much more likely it's
lower than 50 it could be around 30 but
we don't know for sure and in terms of
the number of people who've had it in
each country that's why the antibody
test is so important there are beginning
to be some stories of people getting
answers to that question again I
wouldn't expect that to be a high
percentage and most of the figures that
come out so far are low single digit
percentages but we need to see there is
a couple of examples of a slightly
higher percentages than that but these
are early data and we need to make sure
that we've got the right information
would you like a supplementary there you
go yes can I just clarify so Patrick
appreciate the the picture is still
unclear but you would expect it to be
for example well under 10 percent
probably of people in the UK have been
been infected by comparison to the
situation in other countries is that is
that Sarah no I can't tell you what the
answer is going to be we need to do the
experiment find out the answer but from
what I've seen from other places it's
mainly single digit numbers and it could
be a bit higher in some places and
you're McCaskill from Reuters no thanks
I've got two quick questions for the
advisors for Sir Patrick why did your
modern Committee as members told Reuters
not begin reviewing and modeling the
consequences or the full lockdown across
the country until mid March
and for Chris witty of could ask Britain
created a coronavirus test on January
the 10th why did it take more than two
months to contact many lab labs to ask
them to create capacity to carry out
tests thank you and maybe I'll tell you
what happened and and that's the easiest
way to answer the question which is we
started working on this in January we
had our first full Sage meeting in
January had a pre sage before the end
before the 24th I think was of January
we had an earlier meeting and in
February we modeled all of the
interventions that you've now seen and
those interventions were modeled looked
at in Sage including scenarios of full
lockdown to push the peak out to autumn
they were done throughout February
that's why in early March it was
possible
for the Department of Health and Social
Care to publish an action plan which
included all of the measures and
reported that all of these might be
necessary at some point and they needed
to be put in the right combination and
in certain orders to get the maximum
benefit so it's not correct that we
didn't model it till March and we
modelled it throughout February and that
was of course that was what led to the
action plan on testing I mean you got
remember this is a completely new virus
initially from the time that actually
the Chinese scientists put the genotype
on the web which is a fantastic first
step we moved incredibly quickly to get
a first test there was quite a rapid
ramp up but it initially had to start
off to be sure the test worked to make a
point which I've made before getting a
test that's inaccurate is really
unhelpful so we had to be confident
about that and then it was rolled out in
stages and it continues to be rolled out
in stages and we'll continues all the
way through this month Andrew would you
like a final question yeah I just follow
up on that point we were told by this is
to say Patrick John Edmund told us that
neither him or Neil Ferguson to carry
out any modern links were locked down
until March I'm just wondering why
there's that discrepancy there well John
said to him what you didn't say to you I
know what happened and I've just told
you what happened and the modeling came
in from a variety of sources thanks
Angie thank you very much
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News